Machine Learning for Adaptive Fuzzy String Matching

What is the project?

A ubiquitous problem in the social and behavioral sciences is matching records from one data source to another. This problem is easy when both sources have the same identifiers in the same format, but this is rarely the case in practice. This is broadly known as the fuzzy string matching problem. I have a new approach, and code in R, that leverages human-in-the-loop machine learning to solve the fuzzy string matching problem. This project involves re-implementing, optimizing, and validating this algorithm on a series of applied data sets with social science research applications ranging from election forecasting to program evaluation to healthcare improvement.


What does the data look like?

The data consists of three (or more) sets of paired records to link. The first pair of records are election precincts with different identifiers; the second pair of records are political interest groups, some from campaign finance databases and others from Supreme Court data; and the third pair of records are pharmaceutical names, some from patient records and others from the FDA. Students are free to include their own relevant data sets as well -- applications are abundant!


What is the proposed scope of the project ?

This standalone project is a 2-3 person project, involving software development, optimization, machine learning, and data analysis skills. I expect it will take 80-100 person-hours to complete.

What are the rubrics of success?

The final product will become open-source software, available to researchers and private industry alike, along with a published paper in an academic journal or conference proceeding. A successful product will be computationally efficient, produce validated results (very low false-positive and false-negative rates), and easy to implement for technologically unsavvy researchers.


What is the relevant background needed with respect to the project?

A basic understanding of human-in-the-loop algorithms, a strong background in either R or Python, and the ability to implement standard machine learning tools in R or Python are essential to this project’s successful completion. No social science background is required.


What is the relevant organizational, project or institutional history ?

As a professor of computational social science, my research focuses on building tools to enable and improve advanced research in the social sciences. Individual researchers may spend thousands of hours or tens of thousands of dollars performing record matches by hand, and automating this process has the potential to greatly improve the pace of research.

How will the organization support and mentor the students?

I will personally communicate with project team members at least weekly in consultation for this project. After its completion, I will take the lead in drafting one or more academic papers with the project members as full coauthors.
